[Music]
Good day I'm Norman wildberger last time we
introduced the idea of integral poly numbers
which are poly numbers with integer coefficients
now it's time for us to look at arithmetic with
these objects it's a very nice Arena very similar
parallel to arithmetic with ordinary integers so
let's just uh introduce the basic ideas with
some examples here's how we add two integral
Pol numbers just the way we add ordinary
Pol numbers each entry or coefficient is
done separately here's how we multiply two of
them exactly the same rule 2 * 4 gives us the
8 the- 10 comes about from 2 * 1 + -3 * 4 the -
8 is 2 * -2 + -3 * 1 + 0 * 4 and the 6 is -3 *
-2 we can multiply an integral poly number by
a scalar or a number so for example -1 * 5 - 3
is - 53 and now one new operation that we can
do that we couldn't really do before at least
not consistently is we can subtract one Pol
number from another so 4 - 71 - 25 is 2 - 12
1 and I remind you that you're allowed to
add zeros to any poly number at the bottom
and that poly number does not change all right
so we now have three operations that we can do
with these integral Pol numbers we can add we
can multiply and we can subtract and they obey
the standard laws that we pretty familiar with
with ordinary Pol numbers and essentially the
same laws that hold for ordinary integers now
I'm not going to go through all those laws and
derive them again uh separately and state them
it's a good exercise for you to do it's probably
a lovely project for I say a master student
to write this all down very concretely and
clearly so the main laws of arithmetic forers hold
also for our integral poly numbers and here's our
symbol for this type of mathematical object here's
a nice little exercise that if the two Pol numbers
p and Q have the property that their product
is the zero poly number then either p is the
zero poly number or Q is the zero Pol number all
right so to get you thinking about arithmetic in
this context let's look at some simple and rather
elegant little computations uh that perhaps are
suggestive of other things for you and maybe
you can extend them in various directions and
play around if we take the poly number one one
and we Square it we get one to 1 and in standard
Alpha form that's this expression here that 1 +
Alpha 2 is 1 + 2 Alpha + Alpha squ slight variant
1 - one if we square that we get 1 - 2 1 which
corresponds to this little expression in Alphas
here we have 1 1 * 1 - 1 gives us 1 0 - 1 that
corresponds to 1 + Alpha * 1 - alpha = 1 - Alpha
2 here we have 1 1 cubed this time giving us
13 3 1 and that's just the binomial theorem
a special case of it 1 + Alpha Cub is 1 + 3
Alpha + 3 Alp 2 + Alpha cub and if we make a
small change to a one and a minus one before we
Cube then we get 1 - 3 3 - one that expression
there here's a a nice U rather important kind
of uh identity that we're going to be using
later on quite a lot 1 - 1 * 1 1 1 well let me
remind you of a way of computing this which is U
instructive so one way of doing that is to think
of it as first multiplying by this one so you're
just copying this one over here and then when
we multiply by minus one the effect is to have
a minus sign and shifted everything down one so
the difference between these two gives us 1 0 0
minus one and here's the corresponding identity
which is essentially kind of the formula for
the geometric series and a slight variant when
we have 1 one over here * 1 - 1 1 then we get
1 0 0 1 corresponding to this identity here
1 + Alpha * 1 - Alpha + Alpha 2 = 1 + Alpha
cubed so I hope you uh keep these identities
in mind now here are some basic examples of
easy arithmetic with integral Pol numbers
and many of these will have generalizations
that you can play around with try to find
them 1 1 * 1111 is 1 1221 if we lengthen
this one by one then the string of twos also
lengthens here are two trinomials multiplied
together 1 1 1 * 1 1 1 gives us 1 2 3 2 1
this one we've seen already before here's
a slight variant on this one 1 - 1 1 * 1 - 1
1 gives us 1 - 2 3 - 2 1 and 111 cubed is 13
6761 triangular numbers are almost starting to
appear there here's a pleasant little identity
this one here is essentially Pythagorean triple
type of identity and its uh manifestation in
poly number form now let's have a a little
think about this one here this is kind of
interesting that up till now when we've been
thinking about identities like this we think
of an equation like this is representing a
whole family of true statements one for every
Alpha so this potentially infinite family of
identities is all captured by this one single
equation which doesn't have any variables
in it just some integers with our notation
that's something that to keep in mind for
uh the future that we can capture something
that's seemingly infinite by something else a
little bit more complicated which is completely
finite what a great uh idea that's going to be
all right so to go a little bit more in this
direction next time we're going to talk about
an important link between integral Pol numbers
and ordinary numbers given by evaluation and
that's going to lead us to the factor theorem
of decart I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening